welcome everybody thanks for taking the
time to come see me talk a little bit
about DynamoDB my name is Rick Houlihan
I'm a principal technical product
manager on the database services team at
AWS I work primarily with dynamodb but I
very well versed in a variety of no SQL
technologies and some of what we're
talking about today is obviously going
to apply not only to dynamo but to a
variety of other technologies as well so
just to kind of get started here how
many people are familiar with no SQL
technologies in the room all right very
good getting better every year the and
how many people have used dynamo dB all
right all right so that's that's getting
better to this is good alright so today
we're going to talk a little bit about
some of the history of data processing I
like to go through a couple of charts
here not very much time but just a kind
of level set why do we even want to
consider no SQL technologies when we
have this wonderful relational database
we've been using for many years I will
talk a little bit about DynamoDB
internals the scaling characteristics
and this dreaded hotkeys what are these
things that we need to understand that
affect all know SQL platforms not just
DynamoDB and some of the design
considerations that are important to
keep in mind when we're building
applications on no SQL technologies then
we'll get into a dual discussion don't
know SQL data modeling how do we look at
relational data in the context of a no
SQL database basically a normalized
versus an unstructured schema and then
we'll talk a little bit about some of
the common no SQL design patterns that
I've run into with customers and how we
solve some of their problems around
things like time series data right
sharding we'll talk a little bit about
what that is why that's important and
mvcc which is a transactional design
pattern for no SQL here a lot of people
talk about we need to have transactions
in no SQL so I have a design pattern
will talk about that gets into that and
if we have enough time we'll talk a
little bit about how Amazon DynamoDB
plays in this surrealist ecosystem and
this new server list application
framework that's becoming so popular at
AWS so first off if you look at any
technology you could look at the
evolution of that technology is a
history of innovations and
as innovations occur when we see some
sort of a a pressure point in the market
in the case of data processing that is
data pressure so it's the ability of the
system to process the amount of data
that we're being asked to process at a
reasonable cost or in a reasonable time
and when we can't do either one of those
things we have a technology trigger and
that really forces innovation so if we
look at the history of data processing
the first database we had was the one
between our ears it was a very good
database highly available and you know
maybe questionable durability not much
in the way of fault tolerance single
user system and so obviously we had to
figure out something else so we were
rapidly gathering more information than
we could possibly store between our ears
so we developed a system of ledger
accounting and basically wrote things
down this is a system that ran the world
for many many years and it really is if
you look at the first database anytime
you start organizing data in a
structured way and you start to build
hierarchies or aggregations of data this
is really what databases do so I look at
Ledger's is really kind of that early
early database rapidly we started to
evolve our technologies as we got into
around eighteen eighty you know the the
US Census a guy named Herman Hollerith
came along and he was tasked with
processing all of the data that was
collected during the 1880s census and it
took him eight years to do that and he
realized in 1890 when we have to gather
all that data again we're going to need
something better and that was one of the
first technology triggers in them in the
era of modern data processing he
invented the machine readable punch card
and the punch card sorting system which
was a big piece one of the pillars of a
small little company we know today is
IBM has had a long and storied footprint
on database technology so rapidly we've
all from there through a series of
innovations and what we discovered was
the more we innovated the more we the
more technologies we brought to bear to
process the data the more data that we
needed to process because the more
applications we found for processing of
that data so we went through data drums
who went through paper tape magnetic
tape and we found that the way that we
access the data was really dependent on
the way we stored it right if I put data
on tape I had to read the end of the
tape to retrieve the file these are
things that can we were slow again
leading and
increased pressure for more and more
applications to process data led us to
another innovation which was the
distributed file system distributed
block store drag random access file
system a distributed block store this
was really a turning point in data
processing because up until today or the
invention of this technology the every
thing we brought to bear made things
cheaper right when we started storing
data on disk it actually made things
more expensive right disks are the disk
technology was very expensive so the
next innovation was actually and this is
critical was the invention of the
relational database and the relational
database was really invented to
denormalize deduplicate and reduce the
footprint of data on disk that was its
primary mission the secondary mission
was built to provide an ad hoc query
language so I could ask questions of the
data and produce materialized views that
my applications actually consumed and
the reason we did this was because this
was expensive in CPU was cheap right so
burning CPU by hopping around the disk
and building materialized views wasn't
something that was too much of a problem
when I was saving the enormous cost that
my enterprise IT staff was investing in
racking storage in my data center so
fast-forward 40 years and what we found
is we kind of flipped the tables here
CPU is now the most expensive resource
in the data center and storage is cheap
so why would I use a database technology
it's really optimized for the least
expensive resource in the data center so
we now are looking at distributed data
databases like no SQL databases that
store data in a way the application uses
it and reduce the CPU burden on the
database to produce these materialized
views so what does that look like you
know from a data processing perspective
this is actually a trend that we've been
seeing for 150 years is just becoming
really noticeable now because we're the
tail end of the whip ninety percent of
the data we store today was generating
the last two years this is a pretty
common commonly accepted fact and you
know you'll find forests or IBM research
lots of people have verified this and
from a practical perspective what that
means is one terabyte of data in 2011 is
now 6.5 petabytes of data today and I
see this every day in dealing with
customers right I had customers and you
know five years ago talking to me about
their terabyte databases and thinking
we'll all be 10 or 20 terabytes you know
in five
years from now and that's what they're
planning for these same customers come
to me today and they talk about the
petabytes of data that they have to deal
with and the problems that they're
dealing with trying to manage all of
this data so everybody is seeing this
data explosion there's a linear
correlation as we've seen throughout
history between this type of data
pressure and technical innovation so we
can expect something's going to come
along and that's something today is no
SQL technology and there's really no
reason that that trend is not going to
continue so are we done with no SQL is
at the end probably not there'll be
something else but today this is what we
have so this is what we're going to talk
about so from a technology perspective
what I really see in the market this
isn't really just in databases right
this applies to every technology you'll
see these technology triggers because
people are having problems doing
something in the case of data processing
we talked about data pressure when we
see that trigger will see people run to
market with new solutions new answers to
solve these problems to resolve that
customer pain and customers will
obviously run to these technologies
because somebody somewhere had a good
experience so they know they solved that
problem with that that must be my
solution inevitably we see then people
run to the solution they fail miserably
right it doesn't work for them I have an
application that doesn't apply I mean
you know how many times I walked into
customers and heard that statement my
app doesn't work with no SQL we have to
have a relational database the reality
is you're trying to use the new tool
like you used the old tool and if you're
trying to do this you're going to have a
lot of problems no SQL technology
doesn't like to do things like joins
between tables and whatnot you want to
store that data as a hierarchical
structure so if you try to do this at
the application tier you're going to
have a miserable experience with no SQL
so how do I know that I'm that guy
that's in that trough of disillusionment
it's because you're running around
looking for things to provide the
features that you think are missing from
the technology I need transaction
libraries I need object mapping
libraries I need things that I was very
familiar and comfortable with using in
the relational world my answer to that
is embracing the native api's because
even though those libraries may exist
for you they're there as security
blankets oftentimes they create a lot of
problems especially at scale so I'm
going to talk to you about design
patterns today don't leverage any of
these things
use the native AP is in design patterns
that are very specific to know SQL why
do I want to use no SQL well again we
talked a little bit about how SQL is
really optimized for storage and was it
due to be that way it uses normalized
data structures that deduplicate the
data on disk and then it supports ad hoc
queries to generate materialized views
that the application needs right so
oftentimes the application doesn't
really just need to select data from a
table right in a relational database it
needs to select data from a table and
join another I may have a customer's
table and orders orders table and I want
all the orders for our customers so it's
select from customers inner joint orders
right in a no SQL database I would store
orders and customers together in a
single document or a single collection
of items that would be selected off the
same table so it's bastard no SQL
databases scale vertically right they
don't partition the data store so you
have to buy a bigger box right many many
customers I've worked with have you know
fought this battle repeatedly and now at
the point where they said we just can't
buy another one I had a customer
recently came to me said they had just
invested a half a million dollars in a
ms SQL server infrastructure and then
six months later after having the
Microsoft guys come in and tune
everything every way they possibly can
the answer was you need a bigger box
right they said that's enough okay we're
going to we're going to look at moving
to a platform that scales incrementally
and allows a partitioning of the data
store and so we're talking to them about
a variety of no SQL technologies so
really SQL technologies play very well
in one particular application space
that's the OLAP space right online
analytics if I don't know what the
question is if I don't know what the
access pattern is that my application is
going to require and this is typically
your bi analytics scenario an SQL
database is really the best option
because it supports that ad hoc query
it's not going to be the most efficient
producing those views but you don't know
what views you need now oltp apps on the
other hand they always process data the
exact same way when the user clicks the
button the same thing happens right
they're very repetitive and how they use
data which gives us the ability to store
that data on disk in a very structured
format that's specific to the
application right so we use denormalized
hire our
Gold views of data we'll talk a little
bit about what that looks like these are
the instantiating out of your relational
store when you run that ad hoc query
those views typically get stored in that
context within a no SQL database they
scale horizontally so they partition
across multiple nodes allowing you to
continually grow the database and the
processing power of your database and
really because of this they're built for
I say built for oltp at scale so really
two technologies two different types of
applications if you really want
performance and scale n oltp no SQL is
the solution for you ok so let's talk a
little bit about DynamoDB some lot of
familiar you here they're a couple
people that weren't so we'll talk some
of the basics not too much we'll get
into the design pattern stuff again this
is a deep dive session I got a lot of
contents will run it to the end of the
hour and hopefully we'll have some time
for questions if not I'll be out in the
hallway but DynamoDB is a fully managed
mill SQL database and that's probably
the biggest value of it yeah I worked at
companies like MongoDB I've worked with
technologies like Cassandra DynamoDB and
other no SQL databases and really the
biggest thing that I can tell you as a
customers at DynamoDB they benefit from
the fact that they don't need to manage
the operational infrastructure of the
database it's not easy to run a scaled
out distributed no SQL database many may
servers many clusters and shards each
MongoDB shard has three servers so as I
scale out I'm incremented increasing the
number of servers and I'm increasing the
operational burden on my support staff
now first you may not notice this when
you get to 50 100 150 200 instances you
will start to notice the amount of money
you're spending just managing those
servers so taking that away from the
customer is probably the biggest value
you can get out of an manage no SQL
service like dynamo DB dynamo DB is also
what we call a document or key value
store I really call it a key value store
that supports a document attribute type
we'll talk a little bit about how it
does that later in the presentation to
design points of the technology it was
designed to be fast and consistent at
any scale and we have customers that are
running millions of transactions per
second against item 0 DB and reach and
and and experiencing low single-digit
millisecond latency
very consistently across those requests
and again it's the design core design of
the system was was taken into
consideration those were one of the
requirements that were in consideration
when they design the system fine grained
access control so you have those of you
familiar with I am its identity access
management you can create users assign
permissions to those users to access
your dynamodb tables a very granular way
on a table level on the item level you
can you can restrict these types of
users to particular attributes or items
on the table and then it gets a
backplane service it's fully managed
it's always there you don't need to
provision it all you need to do is turn
it on and as such that makes it what we
call a backplane service that's really
suitable for these event-driven
programming models or serverless
computing right it's not something that
you need to provision is something that
we manage for you all right so real
quick tables and dynamodb like any other
database you create tables tables have
items and items have attributes all
right so items can have any number of
attributes the only mandatory attribute
in any item is the partition key you
have to provide that that's like the
unique primary key in a relational
database table that will uniquely
identify the item optionally you can
provide an additional mandatory schema
attribute which would be a sort key when
I do this now the combination of the
partition of the sort key to find the
uniqueness of the item this is really
defining a bucket right so in the case
of customers and orders right you might
imagine the partition key could be the
customer ID the sort key could be the
order ID now all of the orders for a
particular customer are going to fall
into the same bucket or partition and
the reason we do this is because we want
to line those items up on disk so that
when you when you query for a particular
customer you can get all those orders
with a single table select and a large
sequential read the sort key also gives
us the ability to execute complex range
queries against those attributes so
partition key queries are equality only
when I query a partition key I must know
what is the customer I'm looking for
when I query the sort key I can add a
range operator greater than less than
equals to so imagine the same scenario
customers and orders this time customer
is ID and sorted by timestamp now I can
issue a range query and say give me all
your
for this customer in the last 24 hours
and the and the system is able to go
right to disk right to the location
where all those items are issue a very
selective sequential read and bring that
data back and this is why dynamodb is
very very fast and efficient and scales
linearly across any load because I am I
am literally I'm telling the system
exactly where to go every time I give it
a query so I don't have to worry about
the scale of the table causing
additional latency in my query one of
the biggest advantages of the system
like dynamo so how do we scale partition
keys are typically hashed to create a
randomized range or key space is what we
call it will take those hash values we
will line those items up across that key
space and as you increase the capacity
or the size of the table we will chunk
that key space and split it across
multiple nodes this is a fundamental
principle in no SQL is however you know
SQL database scales Cassandra and
MongoDB dynamo dB there are all the same
and you know there'll be some sort of a
shard attribute that we will use to
create an arbitrary key space we will
chunk that key space across multiple
nodes and the best way to increase the
performance of the system is to get
multiple nodes to participate in the
query activity so we talk about hot keys
hot keys are nailing all the workload to
one of these stories partitions and
we'll talk about some design patterns to
avoid that so scaling scaling and dynamo
DB two dimensions of scale we scale on
throughput in size throughput you
control you tell us how much through put
you on the table in right capacity and
read capacity there's some calculations
we'll go through in a minute about how
we use those numbers to split across a
number of partitions sighs you start
inserting items on the table every 10
gigabytes of items we're going to split
to another partition alright so those
are the two dimensions that we scale on
scaling is achieved as we discuss
through partitioning across multiple
storage nodes throughput is provisioned
at the table level so he's privy each
table you provision in DynamoDB will
have throughput provision independently
its provision in right capacity and read
capacity these two knobs are completely
independent of each other all right so
you will have right capacity units that
are in one kilobyte per second read
capacity at four kilobytes per second
feeds are automatically consistent in
dynamodb we replicate across three nodes
by default when you read after you write
when you write we will acknowledge the
right when to have come back and when
you read will read from an arbitrary to
and give you the most current data okay
so that makes it a read after write
consistent platform you can turn that
off you can make that eventually
consistent when you do that it has your
read consumption so it's a very cheap
way to build w read capacity is use
eventually consistent reads by default
they're turned off so that's something
you need to do in the driver and most
work most access patterns will support
eventually consistent I read so i would
go ahead and recommend that you would
use that unless you have an absolute
need for consistency partitioning math
kind of works like this today these are
the numbers in the future this could
change when you provision capacity for
every 3,000 RC use you know or 1000 WC
use or fraction thereof we will give you
a partition so you take the toll RCU you
want / 3000 you take the total wcu you
want / 1000 you add those two together
and that's how many numbers dominate
partitions you will need by capacity now
by size it's very easy divide the table
size by 10 gigabytes you get another
number we're going to give you the
larger one of the two right because I
need to be able to satisfy the larger
requirement so again in the day in the
future these details could change let's
see how that looks like today for a
partitioning example of an 8 gigabyte
table 5000 RS you used 500 WC use the
way the math runs 2.17 by capacity 0.8
by size that's going to give me a number
of two numbers two points 17 and 0.8 I'm
going to round up and I'm going to and
I'm going to give you the larger so
you're going to get three partitions so
a lot of people might say at this point
why do I care well you care because when
we give you those three partitions we
are going to evenly distribute the RCU
and the wcu that you have provision
across those three partitions so if you
have a workload that nails any kind of
activity to anyone needs partitions that
consumes more than that then we can have
what we call a hotkey you might get
throttled alright so what does that look
like if sustained throughput goes beyond
the provision throughput on a per
partition basis for an extended period
of time you may see throttling now we
have some burst capacity built in the
system you get about five minutes of
use capacity in a burst bucket that will
be provided to you on a best-effort
basis if it's there so but if it's not
there then you're going to get throttled
if you exhaust that burst bucket meaning
you have a hotkey on a particular
partition that goes for too long you're
going to exhaust that then you will be
throttled so again we're going through
some design patterns to talk about how
do you deal with these types of
situations non-uniform workloads again
high-velocity access to a single item
that's going to be a bad idea mixing
your hot data and your cold data talks
about you know time series data where
over time you don't care about this but
if you keep on inserting it to the table
the table is going to grow and if we
grow too big you keep splitting and
splitting and you can see that
throughput dilution gets worse and worse
and eventually you end up with hot keys
so we want to make sure we're rolling
that cold data off of the table you know
again from the example before if we
exceed the 1666 RC use or 166 WC use
then we're probably going to see some
throttling and this would not be a good
situation so this is what that looks
like we have a lot of customers ask for
these these are heat maps we run these
when customers suspect they're having
hot keys I can usually spot a hotkey
without this look at your cloud watch
metrics if you're being throttled and
you're well below your provision
capacity you're probably got a hot key
somewhere either on the table or on the
index okay but this is really the no SQL
equivalent of cardiac arrest right
system is dead it's flatlined there's
you're going to be throttled right and
left your application is going to be
falling over sideways you don't want
these types of situations so how do we
avoid that well in DynamoDB there's
again we talked about some of the
dimensions of scale but really what it
comes down to if I want to if I get the
most out of the throughput out a dynamo
dB I want to create tables with that
partition key element is a high
cardinality set right it has a large
number of distinct values so I'm
spreading the data out across a number
of partitions and then when I execute my
queries I'm gathering data from a number
of partitions across multiple threads
DynamoDB scales linearly across threads
single thread performance and DynamoDB
is not the best right we have HTTP API
you're going to be making requests you
can be building connections and tearing
them down you can't really pipeline
requests so what you want to do is to
spin up multiple threads you cannot
break the DynamoDB API people have tried
there is no way to do it
just like route 53 there's a the API
ain't going to go down and so then then
the next part of the equation is we want
to request those values fairly uniformly
right as and over time so that gives us
two dimensions we have space and this is
about distribution of your data we can
always distribute your data right if
you're having a hotkey problem let's
talk we can make this we can mitigate
the issue times a little different time
you have no real control over when the
users come right if the Thundering Herd
arrives you need to be able to step up
and respond to that and there's some
design patterns will talk about how to
deal with those situations as well but
if we can if we can satisfy both those
requirements then we end up with this
type of picture this is really what
wanna see as a matter of fact I really
like to see a little more color in here
I really like see more of a pepperoni
pizza where we see little red spots all
over the place I mean you've got a high
utilization table you're getting some
random alignment of keys across the key
space that are causing a little bit of
key pressure here and there a little bit
of throttling is OK at high utilization
the driver catches some of that your
application can catch and retry but
bottom line is we don't want to see
those be red lines right those are bad
things in SQL alright it's getting a
data modeling how do we look at data
well TV apps it's all about aggregations
right we talked about customers and
orders we could talk about parts and
assemblies we can you know talk about
any any particular way a customer and an
OLTP app uses the data it's always
trying to aggregate items in a certain
dimension right so this is really the
fundamental principle of DynamoDB is to
maintain those aggregations somewhere on
these tables or indexes right doesn't
matter what app you're building social
networks document management IT
monitoring you name it we're trying to
aggregate data so we do this in SQL it's
a fairly straightforward SQL structure
here we've got products table here
that's tied to a bunch of others through
common relationships one-to-one
one-to-many many-to-many relationships
and you can imagine what kind of queries
I have to run against this database if I
want to get a list of all my products
right I'll run three different queries
one of them is relatively simple to them
are pretty complex and think about how
much time that CPU is spending hopping
around disk to build this materialized
view well in no sqli wanna take a
different approach I don't want
normalized data I want
gations I want denormalized data right I
want these hierarchies to be stored as
items when I retrieve these items I
could see how this was my product table
for example now isolate say select star
from products I get everything I don't
have to go and join data from multiple
tables and drive that cpu nuts to build
this materialized view because it's
already there all right and you know the
interesting byproduct of this is if I
you know really need what people talk
about the need for acid transactions
it's really about updating these
application layer objects where the data
lives on multiple tables right you know
if I don't have an application layer
object that requires be built from data
that's in multiple places then maybe I
don't need that that acid style
transaction to do those updates and
we'll talk a little bit about that later
hierarchical data right this kind of
structures we just saw how do I
represent this though there's multiple
ways to represent this in DynamoDB the
first way would be to create a series of
items and then store these in partitions
so in this example we have a products
table where I've done exactly that we
have our book record that book record is
just a single item because that was that
one to one table right I'd products and
books one to one I can maintain all that
relationship in a single item on the
table right just collapse those
attributes the one too many of the
album's I can maintain as a hierarchy
under the product ID ID to category by
just concatenate amide II and track IDs
together right I can use a leading
indicator that tells me that this is an
album or attract my application layer
can switch on the type of the item that
it's iterating through to build these
application layer objects so you can see
if I want particular album I just say
select product ID 2 i'm going to get all
the tracks i'm going to get all the
metadata that describes the album and i
can build that application layer object
with the single query right this is the
idea no SQL you want very simple
straightforward queries selects off the
table to get you the data you don't want
to have to go to multiple places to get
the data your application needs the
other opportunity of here is that I can
store these hierarchies as JSON
attributes so I've done that in this
particular case you have fewer items now
why might I do one versus the other well
in this case I might go with the second
route because all those items are
relatively small right and I'm gonna
have to pay one WC you to insert every
single item whereas maybe if I build the
hierarchy this way
i'm only paying three WC you to insert
these three items the other way I might
be paying 15 wcu to insert all those
items right so on the read not so bad
because I'm aggregating all the items
and the read capacity is aggregated but
on the right I have to pay for each item
i'm inserting so again depending on your
access pattern one way or the other
might make sense right if i have a very
very large hierarchy I want to go to
multiple items because I have 400
kilobyte limit on the item size in
dynamo dB okay and conversely i can also
support hierarchies of any size right
this way okay let's get into design
patterns and some best practices here
the first thing where you talk about our
a couple constructs that are important
in some of the design patterns i'm going
to talk about so the first thing we'll
talk about is DynamoDB streams and
lambda alright so i hear a lot from
customers about how they wish that
dynamodb had a stored procedure engine
okay and I saw them well you know we
have lambda write lambda is actually the
best stored procedure engine you can
find out there in most databases you run
those stored procedures where are they
executing right on the database head
node if I have a complex stored
procedure or a javascript in the case of
MongoDB you find out real quick when
you're running MongoDB that at scale you
don't want do aggregations and you don't
want to run JavaScript on the server as
a matter of fact the professional
services team at MongoDB will tell you
don't do that and the reason why is
because when you're running these types
of JavaScript stored procedures so to
speak against large data sets you can
crush the processing power of the server
you can crush the memory space on the
server this is really really bad for any
database but especially bad for a no SQL
database like MongoDB that relies on
data being in memory so when you look at
lambda it gives us the ability to scale
that stored procedure execution
framework independently of the database
head mode so I knew whatever I want the
only thing I'm going to consume off the
table is read and write capacity I'm not
going to consume the processing
horsepower I'm not going to drive
latency into the system by running a
complex aggregation or a real-time
materialized view and you know
in a lambda function right streams is
really a changelog for dynamo DB streams
allows you to basically have every
update every insert on the table every
delete or every operation that changes
data on the table you appear on a
durable queue that comes off the back of
the table that Q can be used to trigger
stored procedures through lambda right
so these two constructs together a very
powerful execution framework that you
can leverage around your DynamoDB table
and some of the design patterns were
going to talk about do this and these
are some of the things you can do so it
triggers off the table into that lambda
function a lot of customers will take
that data and rotate it into a
derivative view create a derivative
table or a real time running aggregation
this is a great way to do that use
lambda update cloud search update
elastic cash or even execute you know
external workflows against third-party
systems or notifications so a great
operate way to be able to execute those
types of workflows on your data I used
to use that lambda in streams okay first
design power could talk about real time
voting so in elections typically there's
a long list or maybe a short list of
candidates but really there's only one
or two options to get a lot of votes all
right so if I have a table out there and
I'm trying to aggregate votes and on
aggregating votes by candidate ID and
everybody in the country is voting for
one or the other then what is happening
is I have two keys that are really
really busy that's the definition of a
hotkey this is a problematic scenario
and no SQL right so if I'm running these
types of high-velocity aggregations on
the table the way to deal with that is
to take those candidate IDs and add some
arbitrary random value within an own
range to the end of those what I'm
really doing here is I'm taking those
two candidate buckets and I'm turning
them into 20 or 200 or 2000 right and
I'm spraying the votes across these
partitions on the back side since I know
that I've sprayed those those records
across this known range I execute what
we call a scatter gather I just query
all the partitions and then I merge sort
those results at you know as I'm
executing this query so I you this is
something that you code into the
application tier it's totally invisible
to the developers once it's been
implemented in the dowel and it really
allows you to scale
that no SQL the idea again is to get
more partitions participating in the
query load that's exactly how we do this
when we have these dense aggregations
and this is not unique to dynamo DB
you'll see this in Mongo you'll see this
in Cassandra as well a big part of no
SQL is making sure that when I execute
my queries that that data is coming off
of multiple nodes in the cluster right
that I'm not nailing a lot of work or
all the work in some cases to a single
storage partition so the answer here is
basically shard those right heavy
partition keys when we have those dents
aggregations you're trading off the read
cost so to speak for that right
scalability but it gives you a lot more
throughput against the table a lot more
flexibility when dealing with those
dents aggregations right and will show
that in other use cases as well ways to
be able to use this design pattern use
this when that right workload is not
necessarily as scalable as you'd like it
to be horizontally you can add
additional and you know nodes into the
query workflow by doing this okay next
case we'll talk about is event logging
and it's about time series data now time
series data there's two types of time
series first we'll talk about static
time series data this would be an event
monitoring system you know or whatever
itsm a type of application where I have
no events dreams coming in off of a
number of devices events or metrics or
whatever they are some sort of time
series data when you're dealing with
time series data it's usually about some
sort of operational analytics and
operational analytics operate over a
period of time that is relevant to the
application so that could be 24 hours it
could be seven days could be 30 days
whatever after that period of time
usually that data is not so interesting
anymore right so less queries will be
operating against it the idea here is
that you create this table that's called
your hot table hot table has high right
capacity hi Reid capacity it's taking a
lot of taking all the ingestion has
taken a lot of your operational
analytics queries about halfway through
your interesting period you're going to
roll that hot table back to a cold table
or to a warm table now warm table is
going to have zero right capacity
because it doesn't need to take any new
data it's going to handle about half of
your operational analytics queries
because it's the back end of the time
period that's interesting to your app
right so you want to keep those two
tables that hot table in that warm table
provision and eventually after some
period of time you deep provision the
warmth able to a cold table or you drop
it or you do whatever you want with it
right I like this design pattern because
it allows you to deal with data in bulk
and have some sort of data life cycle
around how am I going to manage this
data right most of these types
applications they want to archive that
data at some point for some period of
time and it's a nice way to be able to
bucket that data up by time period and
be able to at the end of this whole
thing you can run a data pipeline or an
EMR job just pipe it off to s3 store it
off and glacier you're done right so
this is a great strategy for dealing
with that static time series data that's
why the data that where the time stamp
never changes right the entry is made
into the table and that TTL so to speak
timestamp attribute would never be
updated so pre create those tables on a
weekly monthly whatever basis you need
it's important to create a future table
when I create a new hot table what I'm
really doing is I'm enabling the future
table I'm provisioning the future table
the reason why is because when i go to
provision a table and DynamoDB it might
take a little while so if my
applications running I don't want to
have to wait some arbitrary time frame
that's in determining in order be a role
that table I want to have a future table
all hot up and ready and maybe take the
capacity and dial it all down that way
when you're ready to roll up you spin
the capacity up on the future table you
make it your hot table switch the
application over to write to that table
create a new future table d provision
the preexisting hot table and just keep
going right it just becomes a process of
rolling that table over on a regular
interval to keep the thing from getting
bigger and bigger and bigger and
splitting and creating that throughput
dilution problem that we talked about so
the other type of data we look at what
time series is I when I call dynamic TTL
right maybe I have a table full of data
it might be some session data or could
be user data and every time the user
touches the data I'm going to update the
time stamp on that because you know
that's basically after 30 days of the
last touch is when I wanted to lead it
so if I have this type of workflow the
data on the table gets pretty much
spread out all over the place right some
data is hot some data is cold I don't
know which data needs to go so I have to
build what we call TTL index alright so
the way to do that in dynamo DB is
pretty straightforward
what I do is I create this attribute on
there on every item when I insert the
event or the the object onto the table
every item gets an attribute that's a
GSI key and that GSI key is a random
range between 0 to n right so depending
on how many items you have on the table
how big your table is that might be a
pretty big number it could be a thousand
or so what you're doing is you're right
sharding the GSI because what I'm going
to do is I'm going to create a GSI on
that GSI key attribute and I'm going to
arrange it on the timestamp of all your
items so by doing this now what I've
done is I've taken the entire table and
I've rotated into a single index on one
attribute and I now can execute a range
query via scatter gather against that
TTL index and get a very selective query
set result set back that's not going to
burn a lot of capacity I don't have to
troll the whole table I don't have to
run table scan and look at every item I
can very quickly retrieve the items that
have expired i do this with the AWS
lambda running as a scheduled process so
we talked a little bit about how you can
use lambdas a stored procedure this is a
perfect way to do that so this process
just runs on regular basis scatter
gather queries the GSI gets your expired
items it takes them off the table it's
really neat way to do that and then on
top of that I can hook up streams if I
want I can run a secondary lambda script
to actually archive that data into a
second table or rotate it out into a
data lake or whatever it is I want to do
right so excellent way to be able to
take multiple AWS services and build
this kind of complex workflow to manage
your data from one table to the other
and this takes that right sharding
design pattern it leverages lambda as a
stored procedure and gives you a very
efficient mechanism to be able to build
that kind of TTL infrastructure around
your own tables for this kind of dynamic
t-tail time stamp so use that right
sharted GSI to selectively query those
expired items create that stored
procedure in lambda to delete those
items and migrate that data using
triggers off in the stream it's a pretty
effective solution i've worked with a
few customers to put in place alright
next one we'll talk about is a product
catalog product catalog is an
interesting scenario we've seen this
just recently with Black Friday Cyber
Monday on the retail space obviously
when you have those types of activity
high volume sales activities you've got
people looking at a select number of
items in your product catalog
right there there there these are the
deals all right so thousands and
thousands of users tens of thousand
users coming to making these requests it
gives us that kind of hot key scenario
we don't like that that's what this
looks like right we've got a very
imbalanced to access pattern across the
key space what we want to do in this
kind of situation is implemented cash
right cash is a pretty straightforward
solution you're going to put those high
velocity items in that cash and you'll
read from cash first if it's not there
you go ahead and read out DynamoDB push
it into the cash you can leverage lambda
and streams again if you put a right
onto the table you can leverage the
lambda streams I interaction to be able
to take that data and update your cash
right so you don't necessarily need to
manage the the cast consistency at the
application tier you can do this using
that kind of stored procedure framework
again if we do that that's what this
looks like much much better right we
have cash hits upfront cash hits are
free you can use your own cash you can
use elastic cash we have services are
available for you with Retta store em
cash memcache d instances there self
that are managed by AWS you can use the
self-managed instance whatever you'd
like to do but this is the kind of
result set here that you get from
looking from implementing this solution
in that design pattern in that design
scenario and you get more cash it's less
table hits it's going to be cheaper
overall much more performant okay let's
talk a little bit about multi version
concurrency in no SQL or transactional
no SQL right we hear a lot about how I
need acid as a matter of fact there's
some of you may be familiar with the
transaction library that's available for
dynamo dB so these things are going to
be out there for you as you know users
want these things that we're going to
build them i wouldnt even say that the
service team is building these things
but the essay community puts these
things out in response to use a request
and we're actually seeing a lot of
activity in the know SQL market in
general to provide you know
transactional frameworks and relational
types of of you know control structures
in know SQL I will talk a little bit
about how you might be able to do some
of these things do you really need acid
or what do you really need is multi
version concurrency right acid is not
something that's really used a lot in
distributed systems all right when I
have a
bank transaction people talk about acid
but the reality is Wells Fargo & B of A
don't operate on the same database I'm
not going to able to put a distributed
acid transaction across those two
systems so what do they do they do a
multi-phase commit right and really
that's what we're going to talk about
with Noah's ql so how did the oltp how
to use the data mostly hierarchical
structures right as we talked about a
product catalogue write a book an album
write a movie and assembly orders by
customer what you know items by order
you know visits by client whatever
there's always some sort of hierarchical
structure aren't trying to build in an
oil TP application and they use entity
driven workflows right we create these
top-level entities in the application
layer a customer product you know
whatever it may be right these entities
are built using properties that live on
multiple tables in a relational database
right the orders of a customer don't
live on the same table as the customer
they certainly don't live in the same
item as the customer record so this is
the driver for acid right when I build
an application layer object and I need
to update it then I need to make sure
that that object is updated in its
entirety or not at all and this is where
asset applies in relational so NoSQL
we're doing something a little different
right we'll talk about how we might be
able to manage that type of
transactional workflow and no SQL in the
example we'll use as a warehousing
scenario so in this particular case I've
got a picker automated warehouse
DynamoDB table is relatively simple
schema a bunch of parts that make up an
assembly an order comes in for a
particular assembly the picker pulls the
list of parts it goes running around the
warehouse and it pulls out the parts
right very straightforward now let's say
that along comes the purchasing
department they find a new vendor they
start loading new items into the table
the equivalent parts for this particular
assembly this could be problematic if my
picker is running in this tables needs
to be available 7 24 and the pickers
just going to start all of a sudden it's
going to get a bunch of orders that have
some old parts in some new parts and it
doesn't know which ones are which all of
a sudden it's got six parts instead of
three which ones do I use all right
let's say maybe in the six-part have you
been added yet so I've only got five ok
so now which one do I go right and the
way to go about this is to create what I
call partition locks and you do this
with a metadata item you insert some
metadata item or you tag attributes onto
the end of an
existing item that you use to control a
transactional workflow and in essence
what happens the first process it needs
to update this table comes in it takes a
lock on that metadata item by using
conditional update alright set that lock
value equals 0 if the lock value equals
1 all right now if that update succeeds
I know I have the lock I can go ahead
add my new items I can create a version
set attribute on that metadata item
right so that's what that little item
list is right that's an a JSON array
just in its an array of arrays and those
first the first array is one two three
that's version one you know the
application is interpreting this Iranian
nose version one's going to be the first
version 2 is going to be the next you
know four five six that's version two if
the picker comes along and it selects
from the table and I haven't yet
inserted all the items it's going to get
what I call fat read it can determine
how to deal with that fat read if it
knows hey I've got a new version I don't
have all the items it's an incomplete
update you can decide I want to go back
and read again and get the full version
or I can say I have it I have a valid
version it's 1 2 3 i'll use those three
items right either way the picker can
decide the application can decide very
easily whether i want to use the old set
or the new set what have i done i've
created a versioning type of system here
by using this metadata object i can add
additional attributes onto the metadata
object things like timeout right i have
15 minute time out on this particular
transaction or five minute time out
whatever other process is coming in
trying to establish a lock on this
partition could check the timeout value
if it's expired they can execute some
sort of a rollback workflow in
relational technology when you roll back
a transaction that's not the end of it
right we're always going to have to do
some sort of work in the application
layer some failure mode workflow is
going to have to fire when that
transaction doesn't go through in the
database right so this is something that
you allows you to basically control that
in your own application and and and
using the same logic that you're going
to have to code into your relational app
anyways right so using these metadata
items or these metadata attributes on
existing items is a great way to be able
to lock those partitions and create
these kinds of transactional workflows
and use its kind of multi version
concurrency control for no SQL without
having to have a transaction framework
like a JTA or some sort of a relational
database
acid construct so manage versioning
across those items with the metadata use
those metadata items to lock the
partition you can tag the attributes
when you're done with the transaction
you don't have to keep all those items
on the partition you can clean them off
and keep only the current ones or you
can actually add that versioning
information to the sort key so I can
have a selective query for a particular
version of a particular assembly by
using a begins with type of query
construct and say get me version 14
assembly to get me version 2 for
assembly two and I get only the items
associated with that version or you can
read the whole partition right all
depends on what your application
workflow is but it's very useful when
you need those types of transactional
rights across items you can also use
this construct control transactions that
run across disparate systems right I
have workflows dependencies on
third-party systems or other systems
outside of DynamoDB you can use these
metadata items to kind of control how
processes interact or lock that
transaction space all right messaging
app this is really about large items and
what they can do to your table I will
talk a little bit about filtering and
indexing and whatnot in here as well but
the idea here is that you've got a
messaging app let's think email this
could be it may be a video game or
something where I have a messaging
application infrastructure but I've got
some messages table and I want views off
that table my inbox view I don't want to
outbox view so pretty straightforward
select you know star from messages table
where the recipients David there's my
inbox you know where the sender's David
there's my outbox sounds pretty good the
first way I go about this might be to
actually build one of those
relationships into the primary table
right where I have a messages table
that's hashed on recipient or
partitioned on recipient and sorted on
date there's my inbox now i can create
gsi that's you know sorted on or you
know partition on sender and sort it on
date so have table GSI that sounds great
you know what's the problem here well
let's do some math if the average
message size is 256 kilobytes and you
know I go and I select 50 items and
let's say we apply our eventually
consistent read which is half the cost
I'm still going to be eating up 1,600 RC
use every time the user goes to
their inbox why is that because I'm
reading these items that are big but you
know when you think about the view of
the inbox what do I really what am i
interested in I'm not interested in the
the message body right when I look at my
summary view I'm only interested in the
metadata that describes the message the
subject the sender the date right so
maybe a better idea would be to take a
page from the relational book and to
vertically partition this table right
this is an old strategy we've always
used to try and reduce the the ayaat
burden on the storage array is to you
know query what you need don't query for
what you don't need right when I when I
go to the detail view on an email that's
when I need the message body okay so
let's create a GSI off of that messages
table and that gsi is not going to
contain the body attribute it's going to
contain only the attributes I need for
my summer review whether that's an inbox
and outbox out to GS is right now when I
query the GS I use a lot less RCU to get
the information that I need to page draw
my emails and when I select the one
email that I'm interested in reading
then I'll go back and get that data off
the table right so instead paying that
RCU cost every time I check the inbox
let's vertically partition the table get
the big items off away from the small
items and maintain pointers you know the
GSI really does maintain that pointer
back to that message table so you can go
get the body if you need it now I got a
messages table I've got two secondary
indexes one for my global secondary 11
for my inbox one for my outbox I've got
very straightforward system here and
what I've done is I've distributed those
large items across two constructs gsi
for my small metadata that describes my
view and the table that I go back to
look up for that big data so useful
design pattern when you're querying many
large items but you don't really need
all those the large attributes associate
with those items I just need to know you
know the descriptors around that item
let's talk a little bit about
multiplayer online gaming in this
particular situation let's say I've got
a table here and I've got you know user
invites two games right so we've got a
bunch of games that are done but buncher
and progress punch are pending what not
what I want here is to be able get all
the pending advice or pick your user
within
particular time frame right so let's
talk about how we might do that so we
select star from game where the
opponent's Bob we're going to order by
date and we want to filter on the status
right so this is a great way to be able
to take the NOC the records out that I
don't need by filtering on extended
attribute we talked a little bit about
how you can execute complex range
queries against sort key attributes this
is now what we've done here is we've
added in an extended attribute it's not
the sort key the difference here is that
the sort key gives us a very selective
query set right I can range on that sort
key I can get a definitive list of items
right the filter condition only knocks
items out after they've been read okay
so you're paying the RCU of reading
three records you're paying the band
width of sending to you know why is this
important well because maybe I want
actually more selective query if I've
got thousands of items in this
partitioning I'm filtering for only two
it might be better to use a different
key structure that gives me more
selective query because I'm going to pay
a lot of our see you to use the filter
expression on every query so you kinda
getting the idea here depending on your
access pattern depends on how you want
to structure the data and it's kind of
saying with all new SQL databases this
is kind of the needle in the haystack
approach i'm going to take the haystack
i'm going to filter through it and shake
until the needles come out a better
approach might be to take that index and
create what we call a composite key
alright in this particular case I'm
gonna take the status I'm going to
concatenate it to the date and I'm going
to create a new key called status date
alright what have I done here I've
created what we nail in MongoDB this
would be a compound index right I've
created an index on two attributes I can
query this index from left to right I've
got items now sorted not only by status
but by date it's a nested sort kind of
going on in here now I can execute a
much much more selective query who get
back there and I can basically create
just a key condition and says where
status date begins with pending and I
know that I'm going to get everything
ordered by time you know that has a
status of pending right so this is a
much better query a much more selective
query now when would I use one over the
other well if I have a situation where
my every item in the in the partition is
less than 4k total then I might as well
go ahead and use a filter condition
because I'm going to pay one RCU whether
I read the whole partition or whether I
read just a subset of the items it's
still one RCU so if it's if the if the
trade-off is to build a GSI to get that
selective query and use the composite
key or query the table partition I'd say
just query the table partition because
the GSI is going to cost you every time
you update an item on the table you're
going to have to pay w see you on the
GSI as well so again it's that it's the
idea here is to understand what is it
you're looking for in the application
what is the structure of your data on
disk what is the right answer for you
might not be the right answer for me
right so we've got to sit there and and
and it's really tuned you know no SQL in
general very tuned to that access
pattern so if we take this approach now
we've got that needle in a sorted
haystack right I've gone out and I've
taken this more like taking the magnet
covering over the hay and pulling those
needles right out of it right so that's
kind of the approach won't take so the
other thing you can do with dynamo DB
which is kind of cool as you can
leverage sparse indexes all right sparse
indexes give us the ability to index
items that don't necessarily have or
that have attributes that other items
don't have why would I do this in this
particular case we'll save let's say I
want an award gsi who won in my user
domain right and the users that have won
awards might have an award attribute and
they would be then appear in the index
users that don't have an award attribute
they well they don't appear in the index
so now I can query that index I could
scan that index and get a very very
short list of users that actually have
won awards right I can also allocate a
hell of a lot less wcu to that gsi
because it is not consuming nearly as
much because most of the items on the
table and ivory are never getting there
right because that's what we call it
sparse index so that's a great way to be
able to you know support highly
selective queries so replace those
filters with indexes concatenate those
keys to create those nested sorts more
selective queries again it all depends
on your access pattern what you're
trying to do with the application but
it's really important to think about
these things when you're trying to
optimize that query cost as much as you
possibly can okay so talk a little bit
of a reference architecture here
DynamoDB is a backplane so
is like many backplane services in AWS
we have the ability to execute a variety
of work flows through a variety of
constructs for you as we talked about
today you have AWS lambda and streams
these are very effective tools to use as
stored procedures and triggers off of
the table but there's a whole ecosystem
of services as a matter of fact dynamodb
according to this chart you can see as
the center of the universe it's right in
front of the middle of all of them but
you know the idea here is to give you a
set of tools that you can use to build
the applications without having deploy
dedicated infrastructure and this is a
very good example of that this is an
example of an app that we built for the
solutions architecture team it's what we
call our any time feedback application
we have the ability to do typically with
an essay at AWS when you engage and you
get an email from that essay at least in
the AMIA region you will see a link and
says how did I do when you click on that
link what happens is the little form
gets served up from an s3 bucket in that
forum when you hit post on that forum it
hits API Gateway API gateway then calls
up a lambda function logs a little bit
of data as far as the access and that
lambda function triage is to form the
form results some of that form data is
PII personally identifiable information
we don't want to store that unencrypted
right for this particular application we
didn't really want to do client-side
encryption so we actually upload that
PII to a encrypted s3 bucket as a JSON
documents it's up there we push the
searchable metadata into DynamoDB right
this application was built for less than
the cost of my lunch literally okay it's
hosted for pennies a month and it could
scale to support a million users
tomorrow if they came so this is the
power of server list when people start
to look at server list they say oh you
know might be more expensive you know
the reality is no this is it's it's
pennies until the users come so even if
it's more expensive while the users are
there and I would argue that it's
probably not in most cases even if it is
more expensive while the users are there
as soon as they're gone you can tone
down the entire infrastructure to
support that application and and it's
you know it's better than cloud right
it's the next generation of cloud so we
talked about ec2 a lot a lot of our
competitors talked about how they're
going to beat us with ec2 and I look at
them and say you guys are fighting
yesteryears battle right
this is where we're off we're off in the
future with serverless and there's
amazing things you can do with this
technology so you know again this k
application is a perfect example of that
scales Danny sighs host for pennies a
month was built in a matter of days and
was really has been a phenomenal success
so with that that's what I've got thank
you all for coming and taking the time
to hear me and hopefully you got
something out today's presentation again
I remember of complete your evaluations
and if you liked what you saw this is
dat 304 DynamoDB if you didn't well I
don't know what the session was alright
thanks guys